Greetings, brothers and sisters!
Today’s session will begin
with a music-video presentation.
If you have a cellular telephone
or other electronic device,
please adjust it to a setting
that will not disturb others.
We now encourage you to watch
and listen to the music-video presentation,
which shows the joy
that comes from disciple-making.
Please enjoy!
Welcome to the next session of this
“Always Rejoice”! Regional Convention!
During this session and the next one,
you will hear the talks listed
under the Saturday heading
of your printed program.
The scripture theme for today’s program
is taken from Psalm 105:3,
where we read: “Boast about his holy name.
Let the hearts
of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.”
We will focus on improving
our skills as disciple-makers,
and we will see how
the disciple-making work leads to joy.
We now invite all to stand
and share in singing
song number 53,
entitled “Preparing to Preach.”
After the song, you may pause the program
to ask Jehovah for his blessing
on our day’s activity.
Again, that’s song number 53.
Please be seated.
To make disciples, we must be
effective preachers and teachers.
How can you stimulate interest
in the Kingdom message
and then help that interest to grow?
Our first symposium of this session
will consider six necessary skills.
Each speaker
will introduce the one to follow.
Please give your attention
to Brother David Schafer,
a helper to the Teaching Committee.
He will begin with the theme
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Asking Questions.”
How do you feel
about doing things that you do well?
Have you ever noticed that people
who are experts at what they do
seem to enjoy the job, whatever it is,
and they delight in training others?
This is because the more people there are
who understand how to support a project,
make music, or play a game,
the more enjoyable it is
when we combine forces as a group,
a team, an orchestra.
There’s a direct correlation
between skill and joy.
So how do you feel
about the work of making disciples?
Turn with me, please,
to Luke chapter 10.
Jesus loved making disciples.
Psalm 40:8 says
prophetically concerning Jesus:
“To do your will,
O my God, is my delight.”
And notice here
that Luke 10:21 tells us
that when Jesus was contemplating the results
of a particular preaching campaign,
“he became overjoyed
[overjoyed] in the holy spirit.”
Jesus was a masterful teacher,
but as this chapter of the Bible shows,
he helped his disciples
to become skillful as well.
And thus, as pointed out
at Luke 10:17,
they also found joy in this work.
Our joy grows
as we work to improve our skills.
So this symposium
will discuss six essential skills
that can help us to become
not just more effective preachers
but effective disciple-makers.
What skills are required?
You see them listed on your program:
asking questions,
unleashing the power of God’s Word,
illustrating key points,
teaching with enthusiasm,
showing empathy,
and reaching the heart.
This symposium includes
a series of dramatizations
that follow the progress
of one Bible student.
After each video, we’ll discuss
the skill that was featured
and how we can use it.
This will help us to experience more joy
in our disciple-making work.
Are you ready?
Let’s discuss our first skill:
asking questions.
Why should we ask questions?
Questions serve a number of purposes.
Sometimes we pose them just to stimulate
interest and to get the conversation rolling.
At other times, we’re interested
in hearing how a person thinks
so that we can know better
how to direct the conversation.
Turn with me, please,
to Matthew chapter 22.
Jesus knew what was in man.
He could read hearts,
so he didn’t need people
to tell him where they
stood on certain issues.
Still, he used questions
to encourage his listeners
to reason things out for themselves.
Notice how he did that here
at Matthew 22:41-45:
“Now while the Pharisees
were gathered together, Jesus asked them:
“‘What do you think about the Christ?
“Whose son is he?’
“They said to him: ‘David’s.’
“He asked them: ‘How is it, then,
“‘that David under inspiration
calls him Lord,
“‘saying,
“Jehovah said to my Lord:
“‘Sit at my right hand until I put
your enemies beneath your feet”?
“‘If, then, David calls him Lord,
how is he his son?’”
Four questions.
Now, wouldn’t it have been easier
and quicker just to tell
people the answers?
Possibly, but those questions
led honesthearted ones to draw
accurate conclusions for themselves
while at the same time revealing
the true motives of opposers.
Questions are powerful.
But when we use them,
we should keep in mind
the words of James 1:19.
And notice what this says
—James 1:19:
“Know this, my beloved brothers:
“Everyone must be quick to listen,
slow to speak, slow to anger.”
To ask a question
without waiting for the answer
would be like making an appointment
to meet a friend
but then leaving before he arrived.
It was our question,
so we should wait for the answer.
Wait for it, not in a way
that makes people feel uncomfortable,
but by listening kindly.
By listening, we, in effect, say,
“You are important to me.”
Now, unlike Jesus, we don’t already know
what’s going on inside of people,
so it’s not until they
answer our question
that we can tailor our comments
to fit their situation.
In the following dramatization,
notice how a disciple-maker
uses questions skillfully.
The shower is free!
“We are sisters, we are brothers,
sons and daughters, and more.”
Yo!
Give me a truth.
I’m sorry, what?
Your sign says “Learn Bible Truths,”
so I assume
you’re here to share said truths.
So share one.
My name’s Neeta.
What’s yours?
Jade.
Like the stone?
No, like I’m jaded.
Are you going to share something,
or what?
Um, yeah.
Did you know the Bible says
you can live forever?
Heaven?
Is that what you’re sharing?
That’s not exactly new, is it?
No, I mean, did you know the Bible says
that you can live forever on earth?
But why would I want that?
This place is a mess.
But it won’t be in the future.
Revelation 21:4 promises:
“And he will wipe out
“every tear from their eyes,
and death will be no more,
“neither will mourning
nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
The former things have passed away.”
Since there’s no death
or pain in heaven,
where would this promise apply?
The earth.
I didn’t know the Bible said that.
Wicked!
I mean, that’s cool.
Oh, OK.
Would you like to learn
how to be part of that future?
Uh, yeah.
Uh, thanks.
Um, I’m not really
the churchy type, and I’m— I’m late.
So see you later.
Did you notice how Neeta
prefaced some of her questions?
“Did you know?
“Did you know the Bible
says you can live forever?
No, I mean did you know the Bible says
you can live forever on earth?”
—a thought-provoking question
to get the conversation started.
Now, maybe it’s been a little while since you
were able to stand in a public place
with a witnessing cart,
as we saw Neeta doing here,
but we can have conversations
on the phone,
perhaps in stores,
or in the park.
Questions also work well in letters.
Of course, it’s easy for us to think
of questions on topics that interest us,
but what is needed is to think of questions
that others will enjoy answering.
Such questions as:
“Did you know that the Bible describes
a time when sickness will be no more?
“Do you think we’ll ever see
true economic security?
“It would be nice to be able to plan.
“What do you think is a reliable source
of information about the future?
“Do you think we could be living
in what the Bible calls ‘the last days’?
“I’ve noticed that many people still pray,
especially when they have problems.
“Do you think anyone
listens to prayers?
Does God listen to all prayers?”
Viewpoint questions
—viewpoint questions invite people
to express their thoughts.
Often Jesus would pause,
ask people what they thought,
and then listen to their response.
For example, after the death
of Martha’s brother Lazarus,
Jesus told her
as recorded at John 11:25, 26:
“Everyone who is living and exercises faith
in me will never die at all.”
But then he asked her:
“Do you believe this?”
And then he listened
as she expressed her faith.
This type of question can be very effective
in our disciple-making work.
Or like Jesus,
we can use a series of questions
to help people reason.
In the video, did you notice
how after reading Revelation 21:4,
Neeta asked Jade,
“Since there’s no death or pain in heaven,
where would this promise apply?”
and then she asks,
“Would you like to learn
how to be a part of that future?”
We improve our skills
by imitating Jesus.
And as our skill improves,
our joy increases.
Jesus delighted to make disciples,
and we can too.
By asking questions
and then listening to people’s answers,
we may help some of them
to accept the good news
and we will definitely experience firsthand
the joy of disciple-making.
Brother Patrick LaFranca,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will now present
the next part of this symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Unleashing the Power of God’s Word.”
As disciple-makers,
we are somewhat like a carpenter
who has a toolbox, and inside,
he has hand tools and he has power tools.
He likes the power tools because they
save him a lot of time and energy.
He has a power drill
that can penetrate hardwood.
He has a power sander
that can strip away layers of built-up grime.
He has a power nailer
that can nail together pieces very quickly.
Well, likewise, we have a Teaching Toolbox,
and inside, we have many useful tools.
But there’s no question,
the most powerful tool we have is God’s Word.
Notice how the apostle Paul
described God’s Word
at Hebrews 4:12:
“For the word of God
is alive and exerts power
“and is sharper than any two-edged sword
“and pierces even
to the dividing of soul and spirit,
“and of joints from the marrow,
and is able to discern
thoughts and intentions of the heart.”
So Paul says it’s like a sword
that can pierce right to the heart.
Now, is that important
in our disciple-making work?
Yes, because we cannot read hearts.
But when we use God’s powerful Word,
we begin to discern whether the person
is “rightly disposed for everlasting life”
and we can perhaps help that person
—like using the carpenter’s power tools.
Why, it can penetrate
right to the heart of a person.
It can strip away what’s on the surface
and help the person
realize what he really is.
It can really nail down the points.
The apostle Paul
realized God’s Word was dynamic.
That’s why it is described that way.
It’s dynamic because it comes
from the living God, Jehovah.
You see, these words
are not just words on a page.
Jesus said that these
are words from the mouth of Jehovah.
A brother asked this question,
“If you were preaching
from house to house with Jehovah himself,
would you do all the speaking
or would you allow him to talk?”
Yes, when we open the Bible,
we are allowing Jehovah to speak,
and that is powerful.
The apostle Paul went
to the city of Thessalonica,
and he found Gentiles
worshipping lifeless idols.
But what happened?
At 1 Thessalonians 1:9,
Paul wrote that these Gentiles
had ‘turned away from their lifeless idols
to serve the true and living God.’
How did that happen?
In chapter 2, verse 13, Paul noted
that they had ‘received the word of God’
and that word
was ‘at work in those believers.’
Paul rejoiced with those results.
And for us too, one of our greatest joys
is to see how a new disciple
allows God’s Word to work in him,
and he makes big changes.
In the following dramatization,
notice how Neeta
unleashes the power of God’s Word.
Yo, so tell me.
Hi again.
You’re really quite stealthy.
Brilliant, right?
It’s perfect when I’m late for class,
which is always.
Right.
So last week you spoke about promises,
and I’m not about church,
but I am about promises.
So?
OK, well, if these are God’s promises,
wouldn’t it make sense to go to his Word
to find out how to enjoy them?
Seems right.
OK.
This is John 17:3.
Would you like to read it?
Um, out loud?
Really?
Don’t you know what it says?
I do, but it’s nice to hear it again.
“This means everlasting life,
“their coming to know you,
the only true God,
and the one
whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”
So, based on this,
what means everlasting life?
Getting to know God.
But how can you get to know something
you’re not even sure exists?
Would you like to explore that answer
next time you come by?
Who said anything about next time?
Oh, um.
Ah, I’m just winding you up.
See you later.
Did you see how Neeta
unleashed the power of God’s Word?
She asked a simple question
that led to reading John 17:3.
And this is a simple but powerful scripture.
Jesus was the most skillful Disciple-Maker.
He based his teaching
completely on God’s Word.
And when it was possible,
he actually read from the Scriptures.
For example, you may remember
the account in Luke chapter 4,
when Jesus went back
to his hometown of Nazareth,
he entered the synagogue
and he read from the scroll of Isaiah.
This is the prophecy about the Anointed One
who would preach good news
in God’s acceptable year.
But Jesus didn’t stop
at just reading the scripture;
he explained its meaning.
He said: “Today this scripture
that you just heard is fulfilled.”
And those townspeople
could have understood that
because he had left the town,
left his carpentry work months earlier,
and had begun his ministry.
Likewise, it’s not enough
for us just to read a scripture;
we must explain its meaning.
And Neeta did that.
You remember after John 17:3 was read,
she asked this question,
“So based on this,
what means everlasting life?”
And the girl got it.
It means getting to know God.
What can we do, though,
if our listener doesn’t get it?
Well, we can just reread
the key words in that verse.
Also, friends,
we must be careful
not to assume that people understand
the terms we commonly use.
For example, we often talk about the Kingdom.
Well, to our listener,
they may be thinking of heaven.
They may be thinking it’s a condition
of one’s heart, not a government.
So we have to explain.
Also, be patient as we use God’s Word.
Faith in God and appreciation
for the Scriptures take time to grow.
And Jesus illustrated this
at Mark 4:26.
Let’s just read that:
“So he went on to say:
“‘In this way the Kingdom of God is just
as when a man casts seeds on the ground.’”
Yes, like a farmer,
when we spread the Kingdom message,
we’re casting seeds,
but do we expect those seeds
to sprout overnight?
Jesus explains
the growth process in verse 28:
“On its own the ground bears fruit gradually,
“first the stalk, then the head,
finally the full grain in the head.”
So it’s a gradual process.
The farmer waters
and nurtures the seed, but he must wait.
Likewise, we need to be
patient disciple-makers.
It may take many return visits
before we actually start a Bible study.
But on each return visit,
let’s try to help the person
to progressively build faith in God’s Word.
Here’s an example
of how we could help a person
come to appreciate that the Bible
has practical up-to-date advice.
One sister does this:
She asks: “What would you say
is the key to getting along with people?
May I read a proverb from the Bible?”
And she reads Proverbs 17:14, which says:
“Beginning a fight
is like opening a floodgate;
before the quarrel
breaks out, take your leave.”
And then she asks,
“Do you think that this advice
could help us to get along with others?”
A reasonable person would say yes.
How can we help a person build faith
that the Bible
is a book of reliable prophecy?
Well, on one return visit,
we could briefly discuss
the prophecy at Isaiah 13:20.
This says that the city of Babylon
would ‘never again be inhabited.’
Well, 50 miles south of Baghdad, Iraq,
are the ruins of Babylon.
No one lives there,
and no one has for centuries.
How can we help someone build faith
that there exists a Creator?
Simply read Hebrews 3:4:
“Every house is constructed by someone,
but the one
who constructed all things is God.”
And then we could ask:
“If someone told you
that the house you live in
constructed itself, would you believe them?”
Obviously not.
Neither could we really believe
that this whole universe constructed itself.
So brothers and sisters,
this is a powerful tool.
Let’s unleash its power in our ministry.
We will become
more effective disciple-makers,
and we will overflow with joy as we see
that Word of God at work in a new believer.
Brother David Splane,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now present
the next part of this symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Illustrating Key Points.”
Do you find it easy to think up
effective illustrations for the ministry?
I sure don’t.
But some have a real gift for it.
I have a friend like that.
He can look at almost any situation
and think of an illustration.
One day, we were traveling
along a mountain road.
I was driving.
My car wasn’t very good.
It was the best
I could afford at the time.
And suddenly,
a red warning light came on.
Quick as a flash, my friend said:
“I just thought of a great illustration.
The conscience
is like a warning light.”
His first thought is an illustration;
his second thought,
‘Uh-oh, we’re in trouble.’
Illustrations come naturally to him;
it’s just like breathing to him.
Some have the gift,
and the rest of us have to work at it.
But why should we work at it?
Why should we learn
to use illustrations?
Well, for one thing, because Jesus used them,
and he was the greatest Teacher of them all.
Jesus used illustrations a lot,
as we find when we read
Matthew 13:34.
I’ll give you a moment.
Let’s read this together.
Matthew 13:34:
“All of these things Jesus
spoke to the crowds by illustrations.
“Indeed, without an illustration
he would not speak to them.”
Jesus knew that an illustration
is often the most effective way
to touch the heart,
and that’s especially true
if people are featured
in the illustration.
Now, suppose I say,
‘If you’re going along the road
‘and you see someone in trouble,
stop and help him
even if he’s of a different race.’
That’s clear.
It makes the point.
Jesus’ illustration
about the neighborly Samaritan
makes the same point,
but it’s so much more effective.
It stirs the emotions.
It engages the mind.
We feel pity for the poor Jew
who fell among thieves.
We feel love for the Samaritan
who stopped to help him
and disgust for the priest
and Levite who didn’t stop.
We’re determined
not to be like them.
An illustration can put
a human face on a problem
and reinforce our determination
to apply the lesson.
A good illustration
can help a Bible student
grasp the point
he’s been struggling with.
Let’s see how that works
in a conversation Neeta
is having with Jade
in a coffee shop.
Let’s do this.
I’m a bit of a neat freak.
You don’t say.
So last time we discussed
how God created us to live forever,
which raises the question,
Why do we die?
Totally!
Totally, what?
No, like, I mean, I totally agree
that’s what we talked about.
Oh, right.
Let’s open to Romans 5:12.
Wait, uh, why don’t I read it
out loud so we can both enjoy it?
“That is why, just as through one man
“sin entered into the world
“and death through sin,
“and so death spread to all to men
because they had all sinned.”
OK, hold it.
Is Adam the one man?
Exactly.
This doesn’t make sense.
You said Adam was perfect
and wouldn’t die.
That’s right.
But then he sins and loses that.
So, what’s that got to do with me?
I die because he’s stupid?
Well, maybe it’s not
how I would’ve put it.
Maybe we can think of it this way.
When parents
with a severe genetic defect
have children, what happens?
Usually the kids inherit it.
Precisely.
When Adam sinned,
that sin became like a genetic defect
that caused sickness, aging, and death;
and since we’re all his children . . .
Oh, brilliant!
I get it!
Why don’t we watch a little video
that helps put it all together?
Why was Neeta’s illustration effective?
Jade was struggling to understand
how she could inherit imperfection from Adam,
a man who lived long ago,
and she wasn’t going to get past it.
So that was the point
Neeta chose to illustrate.
So when you’re studying with someone,
choose carefully what you’ll illustrate.
Let it be a main point in the lesson
or an idea that your student
is having trouble with.
There has to be a good reason
for using an illustration.
Our illustrations
should be appealing.
What do we mean by that?
An illustration will appeal to the student
if it’s about something familiar.
Now again, Jesus’ parable
of the Samaritan comes to mind.
The setting
of the illustration was nearby
—a familiar road
between Jerusalem and Jericho,
not the hanging gardens of Babylon
or the pyramids of Egypt.
And it was realistic.
There were many robberies along that road,
and the attitude of the priests and Levite
toward that poor,
injured Jew was totally believable.
Neeta also chose wisely.
Her illustration
was about inheriting a birth defect
—something she knew
Jade would understand.
Now, you may have
a couple of go-to illustrations
that you’ve used for years
and years—and years.
Why not look for fresh ones
that make the same points?
Put a little sparkle
back in your ministry.
Let’s consider
two ways of doing that.
First, be observant.
At Matthew 6:26, Jesus said:
“Observe intently
the birds of heaven.”
Jesus was aware of his surroundings,
and he thought about what he saw.
He observed the housewife,
children playing in the village square,
the farmer,
the rich man with his treasures.
So learn from Jesus.
Slow down, and smell the flowers.
Then think
of an illustration about flowers.
But what if you feel you
don’t have a creative bone in your body,
and yet you still need fresh illustrations?
Our second resource
is our publications.
Turn to the Watch Tower Publications Index
under “Illustrations,”
and you’ll find an abundance
of beautiful illustrations
that have been used in our publications.
And as you are studying
our later publications,
take note
of the illustrations that are used.
Choose simple illustrations.
Use little things to explain big things
and simple things
to explain complicated things.
A sister at a congregation meeting
used a very simple
but effective illustration
regarding Jehovah and the ransom.
She said, “When you’re shopping,
you never pay full price
for damaged goods.”
Her point?
We’re all damaged goods,
yet Jehovah
paid full price for us
with the life of his Son.
The illustration was simple.
It was appealing because it was
about something familiar—shopping.
It was also appropriate
to the audience.
There were a lot
of Bethelites in the audience,
and you know that Bethelites
never pay full price for anything.
When you’re illustrating a point,
avoid distracting the student
with minor details.
Minor details—if they don’t fit,
they can get you into a lot of trouble.
If they don’t work
with the main point of the illustration,
the student may focus
on the inconsistencies
and miss the point altogether.
Well, in summary, what do we say?
It takes time to develop good illustrations,
but it’s worth the effort.
If you have the gift,
use it and share it with others.
But if, like me,
you don’t have the gift, work at it.
You’ll be glad you did
and so will your Bible students.
Now Brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will present
the next part of the symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Teaching With Enthusiasm.”
Try, if you will, to imagine a virus
that becomes a global pandemic.
The daily news is ominous.
Fear and panic hold full sway.
Well, that’s not
too difficult to imagine, is it?
But what if they found a cure?
Well, now instantly
the newscaster’s tone would change;
he would be enthusiastic.
And why is that?
Because he has good news
to share to the world’s population.
Well, how about us?
Please find Isaiah 52:7
—Isaiah 52:7.
Why should we be enthusiastic
when we teach those
who’ve been exposed
to the evil viruses of Satan’s old world?
Well, it’s because we have the best news ever
to share with the world’s population.
Notice how this
is brought out at Isaiah 52:7.
It says: “How beautiful on the mountains
“are the feet of the one bringing good news,
“the one proclaiming peace,
“the one bringing good news
of something better,
“the one proclaiming salvation,
the one saying to Zion:
‘Your God has become King!’”
Yes, we have good news that’s better
than conquering one perturbing virus.
Now, in the videos of this symposium,
you probably noticed
that initially Neeta was enthused
and a regular Bible study
had been established with Jade.
But it’s our continued enthusiasm
that can help keep a student interested
and motivate them to act.
Now, in the following dramatization,
you will note that Neeta
learns the importance
of maintaining enthusiasm.
Neeta, your phone buzzed.
It’s Jade again.
We’ve only studied once this month.
She’s so unscheduled.
I thought you said she was doing well?
She was.
Now it’s just, “See you later.”
How was your last study?
That’s a very interesting question,
but it’s not really what we are talking
about in this paragraph, is it?
So let’s just read the scripture, shall we?
In my defense, I was annoyed.
She never even attempts
to explain why she cancels.
I understand.
Really, I do.
But if she’s still open to studying,
you can’t let these little things
drain your enthusiasm.
I know.
I just— I wish she was more structured.
It’s like she doesn’t take
anything seriously.
No study is perfect.
She’s making some effort; focus on that.
If anyone’s enthusiasm
is contagious, it’s yours.
If I haven’t mentioned it already,
I really love our chats,
and I appreciate all your questions.
Thanks.
I know sometimes they’re crazy.
No, you’re a deep thinker.
It’s good for both of us.
OK, um, yeah.
Well, cool.
Do you remember when Neeta first met Jade?
Jade said, “Like I’m jaded.”
The English word “jaded”
means “made dull, apathetic, or cynical.”
And we just noticed
that Neeta was annoyed with Jade.
She became dull, apathetic, unenthusiastic
because of Jade’s attitude.
But that affected Neeta’s enthusiasm,
and it had a circular effect,
likely contributing
to Jade’s seeming lack of interest.
Well, how do we develop enthusiasm?
You likely noticed that Neeta and Jade
speak the same language (well,  almost),
but they’re
two totally different personalities.
We could be teaching someone
of a totally different cultural background,
but the good news is
that enthusiasm crosses all boundaries.
Please find with me Romans 12:11
—Romans chapter 12.
And it’s good to remember
that enthusiasm is not just some giddy,
outward show of excitement;
it actually happens from within us.
Romans 12:11:
“Be industrious, not lazy.
“Be aglow with the spirit.
Slave for Jehovah.”
We want to highlight that matter
of being “aglow with the spirit.”
The word translated “aglow”
literally means “boiling.”
So to maintain enthusiasm,
we need a constant flow of God’s holy spirit.
That’s like the heat source
that keeps us boiling.
So how do we prepare
to teach a Bible student?
Well, we might think,
‘Well, I like to go over
the lesson in advance,
and I remind myself
of what the cited scriptures say.’
And that’s good.
That’s necessary.
But that all is just happening in our head.
How do we get the water boiling inside?
Do you remember
the suggestion at Ezra 7:10?
Ezra there said
that he ‘prepared his heart to teach.’
Well, with that thought in mind,
please find Psalm 45:1.
We need to click the download button.
We need to download
from our head to our heart.
Notice how the heart is involved here.
Psalm 45:1 says:
“My heart
“[it does not say my head;
my heart] is stirred by something good.
“I say: ‘My song is about a king.’
May my tongue be
the stylus of a skilled copyist.”
It said: “My heart is stirred.”
Well, interestingly,
the word translated “stirred”
also means “to boil or bubble up.”
And what’s the result if we get
that action going inside of us?
The end of the verse said that ‘my tongue
[in other words, my speech] will be skilled.’
Yes, we improve
our skills as a disciple-maker
when we maintain enthusiasm.
And we get our enthusiasm bubbling, boiling,
stirred up when we meditate on the importance
of the lesson we’re about to teach.
My wife likes to watch
cooking shows on television,
and I’ve noticed that invariably
there’s always an electric blender.
And I do realize
that in some of your cultures,
you might prefer mortar and pestle
or a sharp knife
to cut things up and mix them together.
But we have all those ingredients
laid out on the counter before us
—maybe vegetables, herbs,
spices, always salt and pepper.
What is that like?
That’s like having
the ingredients in our mind.
We’ve gone over the lesson in advance.
We have the Scriptures.
We know what they say,
but we really don’t get enthused
about that tasty dish until what happens?
We mix all those ingredients in the blender.
We bring it up to a temperature,
maybe even to a boil.
And then after the dish
is done and we taste it,
mm, mm, mm.
It tastes so good.
We get enthusiastic.
We tell others about this great recipe.
Now they’re interested,
and they want to taste
this culinary sensation as well.
So how do we become enthusiastic?
Meditate—meditation is the blender.
We take all the ingredients in our mind;
we mix them together into a message
that we’re now enthused to share with others.
And meditation includes
asking ourselves questions
to prepare the heart.
For example,
before your study, you might ask,
‘How has this information
benefited me personally?’
And Neeta needed to ask herself,
‘Why does Jade need to hear this?’
Maybe it’s the perfect point
at the right time for our student,
and so we should ask,
‘How will what I’m going to study
benefit my student?’
Meditation stirs the heart.
Please find with me
1 Thessalonians chapter 1.
Enthusiasm, or zeal, should not be confused
with being overly emotional.
That would be like throwing
too much hot pepper
into the blender—overemotional.
And our heartfelt conviction
should not cross the line
and become dogmatic
as to what our student must believe.
See if you get the sense
of this recipe at 1 Thessalonians 1:5.
It says: “Because the good news we preach
did not come to you with speech alone.”
In other words it’s not just words
out of the head, but notice the ingredients.
It says: “Also with power
and with holy spirit
and with strong conviction.”
When we’ve meditated on the material
and we deliver it from the heart,
it’s reflected in our gestures
and our facial expressions.
We come across as natural and sincere,
but, you see, animated
with proper enthusiasm.
If you’re enthusiastic about Bible truths,
it is contagious, but in a very good way.
Your Bible student
will not become jaded, dull, apathetic.
Instead, your student will be enthusiastic
just like you—his teacher.
And now, we have the privilege
of having Brother Seth Hyatt
(he’s a helper to the Service Committee)
to present the next part of our symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Showing Empathy.”
Empathy is a quality that is essential
for effective disciple-making.
Interestingly, the word “empathy”
doesn’t occur in the main text
of the New World Translation,
but the idea is clearly conveyed
in expressions like “fellow feeling.”
Jehovah and Jesus Christ
are beautiful examples
of ones who display empathy
in their dealings with others.
For example, Jehovah said to his people:
“Whoever touches you
touches the pupil of my eye.”
Empathy.
And when Jesus was approached by a leper
begging to be healed,
what was Jesus’ response?
The account tells us
that he reached out his hand,
touched the man, and said: “I want to!”
Empathy.
Empathy is the ability to understand
another person’s thinking,
feelings, concerns, anxieties.
It may not come naturally,
but it can be cultivated.
The Scriptures provide us with examples
of individuals who were empathetic.
For example, the apostle Paul,
who was a very effective disciple-maker,
was also empathetic.
Turn in your Bible, please,
to 1 Thessalonians chapter 2,
and let’s read verses 7 and 8:
“On the contrary,
we became gentle in your midst,
“as when a nursing mother
“tenderly cares for her own children.
“So having tender affection for you,
“we were determined to impart to you,
“not only the good news of God
“but also our very selves,
because you became so beloved to us.”
How did Paul approach his ministry?
Well, he says he was “gentle,”
he displayed “tender affection,”
and those who responded to the good news
became “beloved to [him].”
Paul uses a very powerful illustration
—that of a mother caring for her children.
In the human context,
there is probably no more
powerful example of empathy
than that of a mother.
She feels her child’s pain.
When her child rejoices, she rejoices.
When her child weeps, she weeps.
Empathy.
And did you notice,
Paul said that he was ‘determined to impart
not only the good news of God
but his own soul’?
Isn’t it true
that as we help individuals today,
it’s not a matter of only imparting
the facts of the truth?
Bible students need help in many ways.
And like the apostle Paul,
we’re self-sacrificing,
willing to put the interests of others
ahead of our own interests.
We’re empathetic.
In the following dramatization,
take note of how Neeta
provides practical assistance
to her Bible student.
I’m sorry I’m late.
It’s fine.
Is this mine?
My treat.
Ah, brilliant! Thanks.
I didn’t have any breakfast.
So we left off at paragraph 10.
Listen, I don’t have it in me today.
I got like two hours of sleep.
Are you all right?
I’m just super stressed—can’t focus.
I’m really sorry.
My boyfriend, school,
work, everything else
—I just don’t even have time to breathe.
When my schedule gets a bit crazy,
I focus on organizing what I can.
How’s that?
I give everything a proper place.
Yeah, I’m not really
the organization type.
But I can help,
I mean, if you want.
I guess a little help couldn’t hurt.
So how organized
is your place right now?
OK, well,
“with God all things are possible.”
Where shall we start?
You’re the neat freak.
You tell me.
Let’s try and find the bed;
we’ll work from there.
Did you notice?
How did Neeta display empathy?
Well, she was observant,
she was a good listener,
and she offered practical assistance,
didn’t she?
She had some food for her Bible student.
And at the end of the dramatization,
she was helping in other practical ways.
And I think we would all agree
that she showed fellow feeling
for her Bible student.
You and I have to do these things as well.
Be observant.
What do you know about your Bible student?
What are the student’s circumstances in life?
What is the student’s family situation?
Does the student have hobbies, interests?
What is the religious background?
What does your student believe?
Well, be observant, and ask good questions.
And when you ask a question,
give your student time to answer.
What is our inclination
when we ask our student a question
and the answer doesn’t come quickly?
We tend to jump in to save our student,
but that approach isn’t really helpful.
When you ask a question, be patient
—allow the student
time to think and to respond.
And when the student responds, be positive
—commend the student
for being honest, forthright,
even if the answer
is not exactly what you were hoping for.
And keep in mind
that as we observe and listen
and ask questions
and display personal interest,
we’re very careful not to pry into matters
that are really not our business.
And we don’t want to show
inappropriate interest
by becoming overly familiar
with the Bible student.
Does your Bible student
need practical assistance?
Well, as we listen and observe,
we’re in a position to share information
that will be truly helpful to the student.
Avoid the tendency
—the temptation—
to give superficial advice.
It’s much better to meditate, do research,
and then you can give the student
tailored Bible-based advice
taken from Bible-based publications
that specifically address
the student’s needs.
And that is beautiful.
Be prepared, too,
to explain how to apply the counsel.
People’s lives are so complicated;
they face so many challenges
that they may not know how.
So explain, but don’t pressure.
The best change
always comes from the inside out.
In other words, the Bible student’s heart
should motivate him or her
to make necessary adjustments in life.
Does your student need
transportation to the Kingdom Hall?
Well, assist him.
It may be that you can provide
transportation yourself,
or it may be a matter of helping the student
to know where the Kingdom Hall is
and then helping him to understand
the public transportation system.
But whatever help is needed,
take those steps.
Ensure that your student
has wholesome association.
As time goes by,
your student is sure
to lose former associates,
either because the student decides
or the former associates decide.
Fill the void,
and include your student
in gatherings in keeping
with his spiritual advancement
and as appropriate.
Finally, show fellow feeling.
Remember, empathy is not a technique;
it’s a quality that springs from the heart.
And it’s communicated in so many ways,
not just by our words and our actions
but by our facial expressions,
our gestures, our body language
—all communicate a message to the student.
And the student will discern very quickly
if our words and actions
are motivated by love.
If they are,
then we are demonstrating empathy
and reflecting the love and concern
that Jehovah has for the Bible student.
And that is what will draw
the student to Jehovah.
What a privilege we have to share
in this vital disciple-making work!
With Jehovah’s help,
may each of us succeed
in showing the quality of empathy.
Brother Gary Breaux,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present
the final part of the symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Reaching the Heart.”
For anyone to become
a servant of Jehovah,
they must have God’s Word
deeply implanted in their heart.
Now, why is it so necessary
for us to understand that,
and what skills will help us
to reach the heart of our students?
Jesus gave an indication
in his illustration of the sower.
It’s found in Matthew chapter 13,
and we’ll read verse 19.
Matthew 13:19, it says:
“Where anyone hears the word
of the Kingdom
“but does not get the sense of it,
the wicked one comes
and snatches away
what has been sown in his heart.”
So “the word of the Kingdom”
is likened to seeds,
and the soil,
to the figurative heart.
Now, the figurative heart
represents what a person is inside.
It involves his feelings, his affections,
his desires, his motives,
also what he thinks about
and how those thoughts
affect decisions in his life.
If you look back at verse 19,
Jesus said that the seed, in this case,
didn’t grow because the individual
didn’t “get the sense” of the good news.
Now, Jesus has given
all of us this assignment
to “make disciples of people
of all the nations, baptizing them.”
So our teaching needs to help our students
“get the sense” of the good news,
and that’s going to move them to action.
Proverbs 3:1
highlights the importance
of this type of teaching to us.
It’s Proverbs 3:1.
It says: “My son,
do not forget my teaching,
and may your heart observe
my commandments.”
So obedience to God
must come from the heart,
as it indicates.
So brothers and sisters,
it’s our responsibility
to learn how to reach
the heart of our students
so that their thinking, their feelings,
their reasonings will move them
to be obedient to Jehovah God.
As you watch the following dramatization,
notice how Neeta strives
to reach the heart of her Bible student.
Did you think any more
about what we talked about on Monday?
I did.
But why would Jehovah
make a rule like that
—no sex unless you’re married?
It’s totally archaic.
It might seem odd,
but what quality do you
most appreciate about Jehovah?
His love.
Me too.
So if he truly loves us,
look at what he tells us at Isaiah 48:17:
“I, Jehovah, am your God,
“[your God, Jade]
“the One teaching you
“to benefit yourself,
the One guiding you
in the way you should walk.”
But I don’t get it.
It just— It just doesn’t make sense.
Question: Does a little child
always understand why Mum and Dad
warn them not to do certain things?
Probably not.
So why all the rules and warnings?
Well, they love them, don’t they?
And so if Jehovah loves you . . . ?
It often takes time to appreciate
why Jehovah asks certain things of us.
But if we really love him,
we’ll have faith that what he asks
is for the best.
The real question is, Do you trust him?
I want to;
I really do.
This is a good example
of how a Bible study conductor
reaches the heart of a student.
Neeta was calmly helping Jade
to link what she was learning in her study
to her relationship with Jehovah God.
It was not an intellectual exercise,
so to speak,
helping her to gain more knowledge
about a certain subject.
No, it’s really helping the student
to connect the dots, so to speak,
to see how the material applies to decisions
that they are making in their life.
Throughout the Bible study,
we want
to constantly direct attention
to Jehovah God.
And if we’re talking too much as the teacher,
it’s going to be hard to accomplish that.
Your effective use of questions
can help them connect
the Bible knowledge that they are receiving
to the qualities of Jehovah God
—that’s going to make them love him—
qualities such as his love,
his goodness, and his righteousness.
Here’s an example of a question
that might be used:
Why do you think Jehovah
would forbid . . . (a certain action)?
See, that kind of question
is helping your student
begin to understand
the thinking of Jehovah God on matters.
Did you notice it was
not a yes-or-no question?
The question actually started with “why.”
And now that forces the student
to go to another level
of their thought process
to explain the reason Jehovah
forbids certain actions,
and that’s a very good method
of reaching the heart of a student.
Here’s an example of another question:
How does this show you
that Jehovah is a loving Father?
There again, it’s not a yes-or-no question.
This time it started with “how,”
and that now requires
the student to identify the evidence
that proves
that Jehovah is a loving Father.
Did you notice in the video
that Neeta’s questions
were touching Jade’s heart?
She was skilled at her choice of questions
but also in the tone of voice she used
when she was asking those questions.
She was not hurried
or impatient to get an answer.
She quietly waited for Jade
to meditate on the question.
Her method of teaching
demonstrated a Bible principle
that would be helpful for us to review,
and it’s found in Proverbs
chapter 20, and verse 5.
Proverbs 20:5,
it says: “The thoughts of a man’s heart
are like deep waters,
but the discerning man draws them out.”
And so the thoughts of the student
are not always easily discernible.
Yes, it really takes a skilled teacher
to draw those out “like deep waters,”
the verse indicates.
Through tactful questions, then,
you can help your student
to examine how they feel
about what they are learning.
Some simple questions will help you do that.
For instance, How do you feel about . . . ?
or What convinces you that . . . ?
or How would you react if . . . ?
See, those are excellent questions
to help to draw up the inner feelings
of your student.
Now, there’s a caution in this process
because generally it’s going to take time
to gain the trust of the student
so they’ll be comfortable
expressing their feelings.
As a student’s love for Jehovah increases,
they’ll be motivated
to make changes in their lives
to please Jehovah God.
First John 5:3 says:
“This is what the love of God means,
that we observe his commandments.”
So obedience to his commandments, then,
is linked to love for him and,
in addition, love for fellow humans.
Love for the Bible teachings
that they’re learning is going to help
them to make any needed adjustments
to their thinking.
Rather than shame your student,
help them to reason
on the benefits
of correcting wrong viewpoints.
Do you recall how Neeta
handled the situation with Jade?
When Jade said Jehovah’s law
against having sex before marriage
was “totally archaic,”
instead of scolding her,
Neeta skillfully used an example of a child
not understanding the rules
and regulations of the parent.
And you could see as she was discussing that,
Jade started to make the connection
that Jehovah’s law
is really an expression of his love for her,
just as a parent loves their child.
Once a student develops
this relationship with Jehovah God
and desires to make Jehovah’s heart happy,
that’s going to be the strongest motive
for the individual to make
whatever changes are necessary
in their life to please Jehovah.
While it is a privilege to be involved
in the work of making disciples,
Jehovah wants us to also enjoy this work.
That was certainly the case
with the apostle Paul.
Open your Bible to 1 Thessalonians chapter 2,
verses 19 and 20.
Now let’s see how he felt
about God’s message
changing the lives
of those who he preached to.
It’s 1 Thessalonians 2:19, 20:
“For what is our hope
or joy or crown of exaltation
“before our Lord Jesus at his presence?
“Is it not in fact you?
You certainly are our glory and joy.”
Few joys in life can compare
with helping someone come
to an accurate knowledge of the truth
and watching them progress
to dedication and baptism.
We are so thankful to receive
Jehovah’s holy spirit
and his guidance in helping us
in this disciple-making work.
But we too must do our part
in diligently improving in our skills.
As this six-part symposium has highlighted,
as we do our part
improving our teaching skills
in all aspects of our ministry,
we will find greater joy
as “God’s fellow workers.”
Thank you, brothers,
for those instructive talks.
No doubt all of us could see areas
in which we can improve as teachers.
Please stand now, if you are able to do so,
and let us sing together song number 58,
which is entitled
“Searching for Friends of Peace.”
That’s song number 58.